rigging can get pretty complicated
especially as you get into more advanced
topics like constraints and drivers but
maybe you only need something simple or
maybe you're just impatient so here are
some of the basics of rigging for when
you want to get started fast
[Music]
I'll be talking about two main rigging
Styles one is a rig that deforms the
model and the second keeps each piece
rigid and separated for the first one
I'm using a character I made but this
will work for anything you want to bend
and to form press shift a to add an
Armature and if you don't want your
bones to be covered by the model then
you can go to object data properties it
looks like a little running person and
turn on in front this is also where you
can change the shape of your bones and
show the names and axes then just select
the Armature tab into edit mode and you
can select the head or tail of the bone
move them around with G and extrude with
e to place your bones the thick end is
the head and that's where the bones will
pivot from when you're in pose mode I'll
usually do the center of the body and
then one half if the model is
symmetrical you can get the bones close
to the body by using snapping I'll
usually set it to face project and
Center then when you're moving around
you can hold Ctrl to snap and you can
adjust it from there this is good for
shapes that get a little weird like you
could rig tree branches more easily this
way you can also shift d to duplicate
bones parent bones with Ctrl P either
connected or keep offset and you can
unparent or disconnect bones with alt P
if your model is symmetrical then select
all of the bones that aren't in the
middle and press Ctrl F2 to batch rename
set this to Bones this to set name and
suffix type period L and press ok now
all of the bones on the left side of
your character have a DOT L at the end
of their names this is important if you
ever want to mirror poses there's also
an auto naming option that does pretty
much the same thing if you right click
now with all of those bones still
selected right click and choose
symmetrize to copy all of the left side
bones over to the right tab back into
object mode select your model
shift-click your armor aperture control
p and choose Armature to form with
automatic weights and you can do this if
your model is multiple objects too just
select all of the objects and then the
Armature last this should add an
Armature modifier to your objects and
also a bunch of vertex groups that have
the same names as your bones this is
where the weight painting information is
stored and if at some point you mess up
and want to start over you can remove
the Armature modifier and delete all of
the vertex groups with this Arrow select
the Armature press control tab to go
into pose mode and start moving things
around to test your reg out if this gave
you a good result then this could be the
end of the video for you if you got an
error that says bone heat weighting
failed that's because your mesh has too
many overlapping Parts I'd recommend
either re-meshing it doing reach apology
or editing it to make Parts not overlap
or you can split the model into multiple
objects and try applying automatic
weights that way another common issue is
deformation like this which is caused by
not having enough geometry like if you
want a cube to bend and be all curly you
can't really do that with only eight
points so try adding more Loop cuts and
then applying automatic weights again
it's also pretty likely that you'll get
some deformation that looks wrong to you
this is the automatic approach after all
and you can fix this with weight
painting whoa whoa don't leave yet
people love to joke about how scary or
painful weight painting is and they're
right but it's not as bad when you know
a few tricks first of all you can redo
automatic weights for your entire model
or only for specific bones just go into
pose mode and select the bones you want
then go back into object mode select
your model and go into weight paint mode
go up to weights and assign automatic
from Bones blender will remember what
bones you had selected in pose mode and
redo those weights and this is nice if
you don't want to start over completely
you can also try moving bones around and
reapplying weights to get different
results if you have to do this a lot I
recommend going to edit and turning lock
object modes off then you should be able
to click on different objects in your
scene you can select from the outliner
too and blender will remember what mode
you were in last so it's a lot faster
when your Armature is in pose mode and
your model is in weight paint mode you
should be able to control click to
select bones and view their weights
shift-click for multiple bones and as
usual a to select everything and ALT a
to deselect posing Works in here too and
before painting let's talk about
settings I recommend using hambone will
save your life someday first is under
viewport overlays turn on wireframe you
should use this especially if your model
has a subdivision surface modifier on it
because the weights are only going to
affect the points on the original mesh
and that's what this is showing next go
to Tool settings options and turn on
auto normalize this makes it so when you
add weights to one bone it will take
them away from others and you won't have
multiple bones that are trying to
control the same area there's also a
symmetry option here that could save you
some time and if you want to paint all
the way through your model then you have
to turn on projected under fall off and
turn off front faces only under Advanced
brush settings just be careful and make
sure you change it back when you don't
want it to work this way now you can
start painting set the weight to decide
whether you want to add or remove
influence blue is zero or no influence
and red is one or complete influence and
use f to change the brush size you can
also turn the strength down to adjust
the weights a small amount at a time if
your painting is a little sloppy then
you can smooth it out by going to
weights and choosing smooth and then
decide whether you want to smooth
everything or only the bones you have
selected and when you're done Weight
painting make sure to turn lock object
modes back on if you want a more rigid
result with no bending then you'll need
a different approach the first way of
doing this is by parenting directly to
bones and avoiding weights altogether
but this only works if your model is
made of a bunch of separate objects
select one of your objects then
shift-click the Armature and go into
pose mode select the bone you want to
parent it to control p and choose bone
now that object should follow the bone
when you move it this gets pretty
annoying when you have to do it over and
and over again so you can use this
add-on to make the process faster you
can get similar results using weights
and this also works if your model is
only one object unlike the previous way
and this is easier when you make bone
names visible under object data
properties select your model and then
your Armature Ctrl p and parent with
empty groups then select your model and
go into edit mode there should be a
bunch of vertex groups with the same
names as your bones and if you have a
lot of Bones you can click this Arrow to
search by name then all you do is select
the vertex group of the bone you want
select the body part by hovering over it
and pressing L make sure the weight is
set to 1 and press assign and just like
before that piece should now follow the
bone this process is arguably even more
annoying when you have a lot of Bones so
here's a way that usually gets the
weights pretty close go into edit mode
press period or go up here to change
your pivot point to individual Origins
then press s and 0.1 to scale everything
down to one tenth of the size go back
into object mode select the model and
then the Armature and parents with
automatic weights then go back into edit
mode select everything and scale up by
10 to return everything to its original
size this usually works for most of the
model but depending on the shapes you're
using you might have to clean it up with
the more manual method that I showed
before just make sure to remove the
weights on the part you're selecting
before you try to assign otherwise you
might get some overlapping weights and
to clear up small weight issues like
this you can try using this quantize
option in weight paint mode and set it
to one that should make all of the
weights be either zero or one let's go
into pose mode and rotate some bones
around then press I to insert a keyframe
for the bones that you have selected
change the pose and press I to insert
another keyframe and now it's animated
and if you named your bones the way I
mentioned earlier then you can copy a
pose with Ctrl C and mirror it with Ctrl
shift V if you want to be able to pose
by moving the ends of the limbs the
quick way is by turning on auto ik under
pose options then when you move your
bone you can and use your scroll wheel
to change the chain length this is nice
for quick and dirty animations but for
maximum control you'll need to set up
some real inverse kinematic constraints
that's what ik stands for select the
Armature and go into edit mode and I'll
set this up for the legs so you can
either create a new bone by extruding
from the ankle or you can just use the
foot bone if you make a new bone make
sure deform is turned off so when you do
the weights it doesn't actually
influence the mesh select that bone
press alt p and clear parent then go
into pose mode select the ik bone shift
select the leg bone press shift I and
add ik to active bone you should get a
different result now when you move the
ik bone and the yellow bone should have
a bone constraint on it not a regular
constraint the one with the bone on it
you can also add it from here if you
don't use the shortcut shift I these
options let you change the chain length
for legs two or three is usually what
you want if your legs don't bend try
going into edit mode and moving the
joints a little bit in the direction
that you want them to bend and if you
want more control over where the bone
chain is pointing then you need a Target
bone which is what the spot is for do
this the same way we added the ik bone
go into edit mode and extrude from the
knee and ALT P to clear the parent I'll
usually name this something with Target
in the name go back to the constraint
select the Armature then select the
target bone if your leg isn't pointing
the right way then change the pole angle
if you set all of this up on half of
your model and name it properly with DOT
l or dot r at the end then when you
symmetrize the ik constraints we'll copy
over as well so save yourself some work
and do it from the beginning if you plan
to do it at all this video is supposed
to be short so I left a bunch of topics
out like bone roll drivers shape keys
and other bone constraints if you want
to learn more about rigging then it
might be time for something a little
longer and more in depth and for that
you can check out my rigging playlist if
you want the file from this video you
can get that on patreon oh yeah one last
thing make sure to move your model by
selecting the arm picture otherwise